I've always had a split fascination with superstition. On the one hand, I understand the allure of the magical and the mysterious, adding a layer of wonder to a perhaps otherwise mundane world. On the other hand, I find it frustrating that otherwise intelligent and rational people seemingly abandon critical thinking and evidence-based reasoning. To understand the latter part better, I decided to read Superstition by Stuart Vyse, a psychologist who has spent his career studying the phenomenon of superstition and its impact on human behavior.

My conclusion after reading this book is a definition of superstition as "beliefs and practices that are considered irrational or unfounded by the dominant culture, often associated with a fear of the unknown and a desire to control one's environment through rituals and beliefs." This definition captures the essence of superstition as a human tendency to seek out explanations and control in the face of uncertainty, even if those explanations are not based on evidence or reason. Further, our confirmation bias easily leads us to reinforce these beliefs and practices, as we notice when they are randomly validated but discard when they are not. Finally, the social pressure to conform to superstitious beliefs and practices can further perpetuate them, even if individuals do not personally believe in them.

- Exactly what has been called "superstition" has varied throughout history, as the term has been used to describe beliefs and practices that are considered irrational or unfounded by the dominant culture. For example, in ancient times, people might considered it superstitious to believe in the power of certain herbs or rituals to heal illness, while today, we consider it superstitious to believe in astrology or psychic powers.

- It was interesting to learn that the Greeks called superstition "deisidaimonia," which translates to "fear of the gods." A deviation from the religious norm not by kind but by degree. This suggests that superstition has long been associated with a fear of the unknown and a desire to control one's environment through rituals and beliefs. A sentiment that is reflected in the late 19th century's hype around spiritualism, fueled by the fear of death and the desire to connect with loved ones who had passed away.

- The Roman empire was a curious example of the shifting definition of superstition. At one point, the Romans considered the refusal to make sacrifices to the gods to be sufficient grounds for sentencing someone to death. However, as Christianity became the dominant religion, the definition of superstition shifted to include practices that were once considered normal, such as pagan rituals and beliefs.

- It's horrifying to think of all the people whom have been tortured and killed throughout history on religious or superstitious grounds. It makes me grateful to live in a time and place where such things are less common, but it also adds weight to the author's warnings that enlightenment and reason are not guaranteed to prevail, and that humanity's progress is not necessarily linear.

- It would be funny, if it wasn't horrific, how the Christian church has changed its doctrines over time. Witch trials, torture sanctioned by the pope, and heresy inquisitions arouse from nowhere, suddenly considered necessary to protect the faith, before being abandoned as the church started prosecuting other groups instead. Almost as if the church's doctrines were not based on any kind of divine revelation, but rather on the whims of those in power…

- One interesting observation was how soothsayers and fortune tellers have been used as a way to confirm people's beliefs and desires, rather than to provide accurate predictions, thereby granting them permission to continue on their preferred course of action. This highlights the human tendency to seek out information that confirms our existing beliefs, rather than challenging them.

- Stuart Vyse makes a distinction between going to, for example, a psychic for entertainment purposes or going to a psychic for guidance in making important life decisions. Only the latter would qualify as superstition, even if the act of going to a psychic is the same in both cases. Contrary to Mr Vyse, however, I do see a danger in the former as well, as it can normalize the idea of seeking out supernatural explanations and guidance, which can lead to a slippery slope towards more harmful superstitious beliefs and practices.

- One thing I haven't quite landed on yet is how to handle relativism in the context of superstition. While it's easy to look back at the superstitions of the past and judge them as irrational, at least then you could say that they were a product of their time and culture. However, in modern times, with readily available information and scientific understanding, can you really extend the same leniency to contemporary superstitions? The author argues that we should but I'm not sure I agree.

- I was pleased to discover that there has been plenty of research done on the phenomenon of superstition, and even more so when Stuart Vyse guided me through the various theories, specific studies, and explanations that have been proposed to understand it.

- Gustav Jahoda proposed a categorization of superstition into four types: superstitions that are part of a cosmology or world-view, socially shared superstitions, occult experiences of individuals, and personal superstitions. This categorization helps to understand the different ways in which superstition can manifest in human behavior and beliefs.

- I was delighted to learn about the various theories that have been proposed to explain "triskaidekaphobia" — the fear of the number 13 — but a little disappointed that none of them seem to finally nail its origin.

- The statistics on the prevalence of superstition are staggering. Hordes of people even in the most developed and scientifically advanced societies still hold superstitious beliefs and engage in superstitious practices. This does not help my already conflicted feelings about democracy.

- Interestingly, women consistently seem to be more superstitious than men. This was never explained, however, and I can't form a theory of my own about it, so I will just have to accept it as a fact for now.

- Our propensity for superstition makes evolutionary sense. We find patterns in randomness because it has been advantageous for our survival to do so, as it allows us to act on situations even if we don't understand them fully. This is a double-edged sword, of course, as it can lead us to see patterns where there are none, and to hold onto beliefs that are not based on evidence. Whereas a harsher evolutionary environment might have weeded out those who were too superstitious, in our modern world, where the consequences of holding onto superstitions are less severe, they can persist and even thrive.

- Another parameter in the superstitious equation is the ego and social factor. The cost of knocking on wood, for example, is negligible, so we might as well do it just in case it works. The cost of not knocking on wood, however, is the potential embarrassment of being wrong if something bad happens. This creates a social pressure to engage in superstitious behaviors, even if we don't believe in them.

- Athletes often employ some sort of superstitious pre-game ritual. Research shows that these rituals themselves can actually improve performance, as they help to reduce anxiety and increase confidence, which can further reinforce belief in the effectiveness of magical rituals — a common attribution error.
